People who manage to escape
from abusive religious groups,
families and personal relationships
sometimes find themselves repeatedly
falling into similar abusive environments.
It can be extremely demoralising.
We ask ourselves, How did we end up here again?
Adding to the confusion, some
mental health professionals
will insist the reason we find
ourselves in this poisonous spin cycle
is that unconsciously we’re
attracted to abusive individuals;
some secret part of us is
actively seeking them out.
We’re told that on some
level we’re actively looking
for people who resemble our past abusers.
In previous work, I’ve looked
at some of the problems
with appeals to unconscious processes.
As I’ve noted, spurious claims
about unconscious impulses
aren’t confined to the world of therapy.
They crop up in the social
sciences and social media.
But it’s in the therapeutic
arena that bogus speculations
about our unconscious motives
are possibly most potent.
Clients look to therapists for support and insight
and many clients can become
extremely vulnerable to suggestion.
For that reason, therapists need to exercise
caution about the ideas they express
and how forcefully they express them.
Not all therapists do.
Over the years people have
shared many personal experiences
in individual or group therapy
in which it was claimed
they were bringing their misfortunes, their
abuse, even their physical illnesses on themselves
through their own unconscious wishes.
Effectively, they were being told
they had a double consciousness.
Two separate functioning minds.
Beyond the one they were familiar
with from direct experience
there was a second mind operating
entirely outside of their awareness
hidden behind an impenetrable veil.
A mind with its own separate
desires and motivations.
Like some unseen backseat driver
it could take over and steer
them in the direction it wanted.
Any conscious decision could be overruled if it
conflicted with the backseat driver’s agenda.
When that happened, without even realising it
individuals might start sidelining
or sabotaging their intended goals
to satisfy the wishes of their secret mind.
Targets of abuse who were consciously
determined to avoid abusers
could be hypnotically compelled to seek them out
in response to some nonconscious impulse.
Maybe their secret mind still
had feelings for a past abuser
and wanted to find a substitute to
help them re-enact that relationship
hoping for a better outcome.
Maybe their secret mind was haunted
by a guilty memory and wanted to be punished.
In the grip of this undetectable influence
individuals could then find themselves
repeatedly sleepwalking
into abusive relationships.
Or so some therapists would have them believe.
Folks from certain religious
backgrounds might spot a resemblance
between this conjecture about the unconscious
and conjecture about demonic possession.
In both cases, there’s an
attempt to explain behaviour
by appealing to an inaccessible mind.
Because of that inaccessibility
any assertions made about the motives
of these supposed hidden minds
are unfalsifiable speculations.
Peddlers of demons are free to
posit any demonic desire they like
— and peddlers of the unconscious
can posit any unconscious intention —
all without any fear of empirical refutation.
In both cases, clients are
expected to accept their assertions
based purely on fallacious appeals to authority.
Their assertions are true because they say so.
The concept of unconscious motives might
appeal vividly to our imaginations.
It can certainly make for entertaining fiction.
Alfred Hitchcock revisited the
concept as a central plot device
in various films including
Spellbound, Psycho and Marnie.
But it has no place in therapy.
There’s a common misconception
that therapy’s about coming up with
dazzling psychological theories;
wildly inventive counterintuitive leaps.
In fact therapy is about
straightforward detective work.
Therapists and their clients
form an investigative alliance.
With focused attention, they work together
to pick up solid practical clues and build them
into an accurate evidence-based picture
that illuminates the substantive issues at play.
When we ground ourselves in
disciplined empirical investigation
big problems quickly emerge with
the notion that cycles of abuse
must indicate some underlying
attraction to abusers.
Many targets who’ve repeatedly found
themselves in abusive relationships
report that their abusers behaved
completely differently when they first met.
Often it wasn’t so much that they
came as wolves in sheep’s clothing.
Many abusers were more like wolves behind mirrors.
They appeared to like all the
same things as the target.
Share all the same values.
Whether the abusive parties
were individuals or groups
at the start of the relationship, targets were
presented with a reflection of themselves.
The mirror would only be dropped
when the target had been reeled in.
So were these targets attracted to
people who reminded them of past abusers
or people like themselves.
The evidence points unambiguously to the latter.
The fallacious assumption repeatedly made
by proponents of the unconscious
is that if you keep having the same experience
some part of you must want it.
But we don’t have to look far for
examples that refute this assumption.
For instance, we wouldn’t assume an individual
who’d been repeatedly financially
scammed by con artists
was ‘unconsciously’ seeking those abusers out.
We wouldn’t suggest there was some secret desire
to re-enact the original
scam with a positive outcome.
Instead, we’d recognise that the fact the
individual kept getting repeatedly scammed
probably meant there were ongoing
vulnerabilities that weren’t being addressed.
Maybe the individual was too trusting or
unaware of some important warning signs.
We’d be looking to see how we
might help build better defences.
And yet when it comes to abusive relationships
for some therapists, the standard supposition
is that targets of these con artists
must be driven to replay the past.
It’s worth taking a moment to address
a couple of straw man arguments
that I’ve had put to me on this subject.
Am I saying:
‘No one was ever drawn to individuals
they believed to be dangerous or abusive?’
No.
During his public trial in the late 1970s
serial rapist and killer Ted Bundy
amassed a sizeable female following.
Many of them turned up at his court hearings.
Some went as far as deliberately
arranging their hair
in the same distinctive style as Bundy’s victims.
Some believed he was innocent.
But others had a more complex response.
They believed Bundy was guilty
but believed they would be safe with him.
They imagined that unlike the women he’d killed
they would somehow win him over.
Am I saying:
‘No one was ever drawn to individuals
who reminded them of abusive loved ones?’
No. Somebody I used to know married a man
explicitly because he reminded
her of her dead father.
Her marriage became a replay of her childhood.
The fights. The broken promises.
The random absences as he disappeared for days.
His failure to hold down any job,
dragging them into increasing debt.
She confessed that she struggled
with constant loneliness
overwork and financial hardship.
But she said, from the moment they met
it was like having her father back.
And she didn’t want to lose that feeling again.
The fundamental point about Bundy’s followers
and the women who married her father
is that their attraction to abusers was conscious.
They saw the menace in their midst
and chose to walk towards it.
That makes their situation entirely different
from cases where targets are drawn in
by deception and fail to see the menace.
I want to present some real-life
examples of individuals
who were told they were unconsciously
attracted to abusive situations.
I’ll be looking at how each of them pushed past
that fallacious diagnosis and
discovered concrete practical answers
that helped them break their abusive patterns.
These examples also illustrate
the huge differences
that can exist between one
target of abuse and the next.
Different vulnerabilities,
different response styles
and different reasons for tolerating abuse.
As always, details are
disguised to preserve anonymity.
Adam was born into a family dominated
by a malignant narcissistic
matriarch, prone to violent rages.
She nicknames him ‘the clown’
and routinely threatens
to send him away to the circus.
At the same time, she does everything
she can to stop him ever leaving
sabotaging any sign of independence.
Despite her efforts, Adam eventually
finds a steady job and moves out.
After signing up to a dating
app, he’s approached by Diane.
She’s like no one he’s ever
known. Kind, empathic, generous.
Before he knows it, they’re married.
And her caring persona cracks.
She becomes cruel and mocking and
starts flying into violent rages.
Adam feels like he’s married a stranger.
But he stands firmly by his marriage vows
even when Diane begins to
flaunt a string of lovers.
Finally she divorces him for another man.
After the split, Adam is pursued by Fiona
a coworker who supported him
tirelessly through his divorce.
Before he knows it, they’re married.
With nauseating deja vu he watches her
kind demeanour dissolve into violent rages.
Feeling devastated and trapped, Adam signs up
for six sessions at a counselling charity.
His therapist tells him he’s
drawn to abusive partners
because he’s looking for women like his mother.
On a symbolic level he’s trying
to win his mother’s love.
Adam says his wives were nothing like
his mother before he married them.
But his therapist says he would’ve picked
up on their real natures unconsciously.
He bows to her professional opinion.
After six sessions talking about his
mother, Adam emerges none the wiser.
Still desperate for a solution, he
decides to continue with therapy
and engages a long-term private therapist
who he’s surprised to find takes a
very different empirical approach.
She explores two practical questions.
First, what factors drew
Adam into these marriages?
Second, when he realised they were abusive
what kept him in these marriages?
Together they identified some of the
actual issues driving Adam’s abusive cycle.
First, they acknowledged a
simple truth: Adam was deceived.
Both of his wives had misled him
with a string of lies and misrepresentations.
There was no substantive reason to
believe some secret part of his mind
had seen through their
deception to their true natures
or made any connection
between them and his mother.
In looking at how he’d been manipulated
Adam recalled how overwhelmed he’d
felt when he began seeing them.
In the rare moments they
weren’t physically together
they’d be constantly phoning and messaging him.
They blocked out everything and everyone else.
At the time he read their intensity as love.
Now he could see how they were
giving him no space to think.
Adam also recognised he had a
problem handling positive attention.
It aroused a jumble of feelings.
He enjoyed it. And it made him squirm.
He felt grateful and obligated
as if he was being given too much of something;
building up some kind of debt.
He wanted to run from it. And wanted more of it.
In this conflicted state, he
felt constantly off balance.
Many targets of abuse struggle
with positive attention.
They might flee from a compliment.
This kind of discomfort can
act like a signpost to abusers
reading: ‘Not accustomed to being treated well’.
In the process of identifying
these kinds of factors
the mystery of how Adam found himself
married to complete strangers began to make sense.
This practical awareness also helped
immunise him from future repetition.
When Adam reflected on what kept
him in these abusive marriages
his reflex response was that he had no choice.
He’d made solemn marriage vows he couldn’t break.
Adam’s therapist explored where
this rigid thinking came from.
Adam recognised his father’s voice.
From an early age, Adam had strongly
aligned himself with his father
who he saw as the good parent,
and aspired to uphold his values.
A value frequently repeated by his
father was: Never break a promise.
Thinking further back, Adam could hear
his grandfather’s voice in there too.
Both men saw divorce as something deeply shameful.
Adam had absorbed these values as absolute law.
Now he could see how they’d kept him
imprisoned in two abusive marriages.
In reassessing his father’s values,
he began to reassess his father.
He used to see him as a man of
superhuman integrity and patience.
Now he just seemed trapped —
straightjacketed by the same
rigid over-simplistic values
he’d passed down to Adam.
As Adam became aware of the actual
issues driving his cycle of abuse
he was able to start addressing them.
No longer feeling obliged to keep
his marriage vows, he left Fiona.
His mother tried to shame him
over his two failed marriages.
But Adam said he preferred to think
of them as two successful divorces.
Cally wrote to me a couple of years ago.
She was also in her second abusive
relationship when she entered therapy.
Cally was raised in a religious high-control group
that governed almost every area of her life
from social to educational to professional.
When she began to resist that
control, she was reprimanded.
When she persisted, she was shunned —
abandoned by her entire community,
including all her family and friends.
In the unimaginable desolation of losing
a lifetime of relationships overnight
the single consolation she held onto was
that she’d never be controlled again.
In the gruelling process of rebuilding
her life from nothing, she met Sean.
In no time, she was completely under his control.
When he first began to take over
she made some attempts to stand her ground.
When he didn’t back down
she was horrified to see
herself sink into compliance.
She stayed with Sean for a few years
before growing hints of physical
violence drove her to secretly organise
a new job and apartment and one day disappear.
As Cally began to rebuild her life
for the second time, she met Manny.
This time things would be different.
In no time at all, they were the same.
Cally engaged a therapist who told her
she was attracted to controlling individuals
because some part of her wanted to
recreate her controlling upbringing.
He said she equated being
controlled with being loved.
When Cally rejected this idea, he became insistent
and told her she needed to face
her desire to be controlled.
As Cally noted, leaving a controlling therapist
was a lot more straightforward
than leaving a controlling partner.
Cally found a new therapist
who helped her identify
some of the actual issues of the situation.
The central issue was that since
losing everyone she’d ever loved
she now had intense autophobia —
a crushing fear of being alone.
That phobia had various effects.
Cally was constantly desperate for company.
She was never unavailable.
And always keen to stay a little longer.
Cally’s therapist noted her anguish
each week when her time was up.
This insatiable hunger for company left
her extremely vulnerable to exploitation.
Her fear of being alone also
affected her choice of company.
She tended to favour individuals
who, like her, were always available.
A big part of what attracted her to Sean and Manny
was that they’d never seemed to want to leave.
She could see now it wasn’t a
great basis for choosing a partner.
Cally’s autophobia severely compromised
her boundaries and her standards.
She said she felt like water around rock.
Other people had all the power.
She hated being controlled.
She didn’t equate it with love.
But she endured it because
being alone felt even worse.
Cally’s therapy was about becoming
comfortable with her own company.
Not quick or easy work.
But it gave her back her
power and broke the cycle.
After leaving Manny, she found she was in no rush
to get involved with someone else.
For the first time in her life, she felt free.
Finn’s story illustrates the lengths
some therapists go to to
confirm their assumptions.
Finn enters therapy after leaving
a malignant political group.
It’s not the first malignant
ideological community he’s joined.
And his experiences follow
an almost identical pattern.
The first is an evangelical religious sect
he’s recruited into by some
teachers at his school.
The joyful buzz exuded by its members
contrasts sharply with his dull home life
and he throws himself into his new community.
But gradually he begins to notice something’s off.
He discovers that various social
prejudices are being promoted.
Innocent groups are said to
be demonically possessed.
Finn throws himself into
mending his precious community
taking a stand against these poisonous ideas.
In response, it’s suggested
he’s having a crisis of faith.
When he continues to speak
out he’s told he’s possessed.
Finn persists until finally he’s expelled.
Finn joins a spiritual healing group.
It’s an extremely supportive atmosphere
and he throws himself into his new community.
But gradually he begins to notice something’s off.
The leaders can be aggressively
patronising and infantilising.
Finn sees some of his fellow members
regress into timid compliant children
afraid to disagree with the leaders.
He throws himself into mending
his precious community.
In response, he’s told he
has psychological issues.
The leaders suggest he’s disrupting the group
because on an unconscious level
he wants to make himself an outsider
just like he did in his evangelical group.
Finn persists until finally he’s expelled.
Finn joins a political group.
The members are passionate
about truth, peace and justice
echoing his own values
and he throws himself into his new community.
But gradually he begins to notice something’s off.
There’s a bullying tribalistic mentality.
Dissenting opinions are punished
with verbal abuse and wild smear campaigns.
Finn throws himself into
mending his precious community.
In response, he’s labelled an enemy and a fraud.
Finn persists until finally he’s expelled.
After listening to Finn’s accounts
his therapist says what
she’s hearing is a little boy
trying over and over to
mend his own abusive family.
Finn says his family wasn’t abusive.
To his bewilderment, she contradicts him.
She says her experience tells
her his family was abusive.
She says his extreme persistence
in trying to mend these abusive groups
indicates there’s something deeper going on here.
She tells him memories of abuse
can sometimes be repressed —
hidden from the conscious mind
because they’re too painful.
Finn insists his family wasn’t abusive.
But she won’t have it.
It was in that moment
watching himself fighting to be heard
by someone he was paying to listen
that Finn saw the driving
force behind his abusive cycle.
He ended the session and didn’t return.
Some time later he found a
name for that driving force.
The sunk cost trap refers to our tendency
to continue some activity or undertaking
solely on the basis that we’ve already made
some significant investment in it —
specifically, an investment we can’t get back.
Hence the word ‘sunk’ meaning unrecoverable.
The thing we invest in could be anything —
a business, a relationship, an ideological group.
The resources we invest could take various forms —
time, money, effort, emotion.
Finn had no reverse gear.
He lived by the motto ‘I’ve
started so I’ll finish’.
Once he committed himself to something
he would see it through to the end.
Whatever it was.
From joining an ideological group
to reading a book or watching a movie.
He hated the idea of giving up on any project
he’d made some kind of investment in.
It would feel like the chunk of his life
he’d spent on the project
had been a complete waste.
Of course the result of stubbornly
completing every project he started
was that he ended up wasting
so much more of his life
on unfulfilling enterprises
than he ever would have
if he’d just allowed himself to let go.
Finn recognised that part of the reason
he repeatedly fell into this trap
was his tendency to throw
himself into things impulsively
on the basis of a positive first impression.
He needed to ease in slowly with eyes open.
But most importantly, if he
began to notice something was off
instead of automatically going into mending mode
he needed to soberly assess whether
to continue or end his investment.
As Finn said, he needed to recognise
when he was just rearranging
deck chairs on the Titanic
and jump ship.
I’ll end with Muna’s story.
Muna was a client I saw when I
was working at a therapy charity.
I took over her case when her previous
therapist left the organisation.
Muna came from a large family
dominated by an abusive father
whose drinking and gambling left them destitute.
He died in her early teenage years
and the children were split
into different foster homes.
Muna came to therapy in the
aftermath of an abusive relationship
with an alcoholic gambler who’d
leeched off of her for months
to sustain his addictions before
disappearing, leaving her destitute.
He told Muna that in life there
were drivers and passengers.
He was a driver.
She was a passenger.
In our first couple of sessions, Muna offered
very little information about herself.
When she did offer something, she’d pause
and ask: ‘What does that say about me?’
Each time I’d tell her I didn’t
know and ask her what she thought.
She’d say she didn’t know either.
Some months later I found out
my predecessor had been in the habit
of over-analysing whatever Muna said.
Everything was given some interpretation.
Muna had been waiting for me to do the same.
As she realised I didn’t operate that way
she slowly began to take up more space.
She said my predecessor told her
she’d let this abuser into her life
because she wanted her father back.
I asked if she thought that was true.
She stalled for a long time
and asked me what I thought.
I gave the question back.
Finally, she said no.
She’d never wanted her father back.
After another long pause, watching my reaction
she said she was relieved when he died.
She said he terrified her.
She remembered how some of her siblings
managed to avoid his violent rages
by running out of the house.
But she would just stand there
rooted to the spot and take it.
She said she felt like a seahorse.
She’d seen a documentary
once about Chinese medicine.
They used dried seahorses to
treat all kinds of conditions.
She remembered seeing a diver
collecting the seahorses from
the underwater plant beds.
They did nothing to defend themselves.
They just froze.
Like they were hoping they wouldn’t be seen.
They were easy pickings.
That’s how she saw herself.
With her father, with
bullies at school or at work.
She just froze and took it.
And it was the same with her recent abuser.
She hadn’t wanted anything to do with him.
He just came in, took what he wanted and left.
If he hadn’t left, she’d
still be taking his abuse.
Muna was stuck in a maladaptive freeze response.
Like fight and flight responses,
freezing is a survival strategy.
In the face of certain threats
instinctively immobilising ourselves
can sometimes help protect us from harm.
But it becomes maladaptive when it
serves to make us more vulnerable.
Many targets of abuse become stuck
in one fixed reflex strategy in
response to conflict and threats
always fighting, always flying
or, like Muna, always freezing
even when it works against them.
Because of the automatic habitual
nature of these responses
it can be hard to move out of them.
It can take lots of physical practice
to build alternative responses
into the individual’s behavioural repertoire.
Muna’s therapy focused on cultivating the ability
to take action to defend her boundaries.
In addition to our sessions
she decided to sign up for
some assertiveness classes.
She found a great group and
progressed in huge strides.
She said she found assertiveness addictive
and she’d delight in reporting real life incidents
where she put her training into action.
In our final session
I remarked that Muna was no longer a seahorse.
She said no — she was still a seahorse.
But a seahorse who’d learned kung fu.
Therapy is straightforward detective work.
The therapist and client form
an investigative alliance
to examine accessible evidence and
figure out together what’s going on.
Therapists who try to tell clients
what their unconscious motives
are violate that alliance by venturing
into unsubstantiated speculation
on bogus material to which neither the
client nor the therapist has access.
In fact I consider the
practice of making assertions
about clients’ unconscious motives
to be a form of gaslighting.
Clients are being encouraged
to doubt their own mind.
Thankfully much of the therapy world
has firmly distanced itself
from these outdated practices —
sad vestiges from the infancy of talking therapy
when some astounding abuses were
routinely imposed on clients.
Adam, Cally, Finn and Muna were all told
they unconsciously wanted to
re-enact their abusive past.
Not only was this assertion
unsubstantiated in every case
it also served as a huge distraction
from the actual issues driving
each person’s abusive cycle.
It was only when they moved
past that bogus assertion
that they were able to start
getting to grips with those issues.
Breaking abusive patterns
often involves becoming aware
of things we’re doing
automatically, without reflection.
Each individual here had distinctive
vulnerabilities not shared by the others.
The key to their respective recoveries
lay in identifying and addressing
the specific vulnerabilities
operating in each case.
With that knowledge they were
able to end their cycles of abuse.
And I would encourage anyone to
follow their brilliant example
and ditch any therapist who tells you
you’re unconsciously seeking abusers.